Welcome to PydyTuesday Uncut, where we show you how datasets are truly analyzed,
warts, dead ends, and messy reality included. Today, I'm joined by a very special guest,
Wes McKinney, creator of pandas, Apache Arrow, Ibis, among other things. And yeah, he's been
watching data scientists struggle with messy datasets for, well, close to two decades now.
I am super excited that today he is jumping into the trenches with us. Wes, welcome to the show.
Thanks for having me on. It's going to be fun.
It is. Yeah, so Wes, very quickly, I mean, we can talk about those projects for the next hour,
but we actually have some work to do. We have to analyze some data, but very quickly,
you're my colleague at Posit. So you're a principal architect. And you know, what we'll do
is we'll include some links to some great interviews that you've done recently, including
the one with Michael Chow on the test set. And I believe that tomorrow, the second part is going
to come out. And yeah, so we'll make sure to include links to those interviews. At this point,
before we start, it's actually a good idea to mention that we are both going to be at Posit
Conf happening this September, where we're both going to be giving a talk, but we're also going
to be doing a book signing session. You, of course, for the third edition of Python for Data Analysis.
And I'll be signing Python Polars, the Definitive Guide. So lots of interesting
things happening there. And yeah, of course, looking forward to seeing you there in person.
For now, it's remote. And yeah. Yeah, it's in Atlanta. So, you know, it'd definitely be great
to see more folks there and look forward to do the book signing. I'm giving a talk about some
of the work that I've been involved with in Positron. And maybe we'll have a chance to
take a look at that today while we're analyzing datasets also.
Yeah, that's a good idea. Yeah. Yeah. Talk about Positron. And I'll be doing a talk
or a workshop about Polars. Maybe we get to combine the two today. And yeah, just like before,
I'm the driver. And this time you're the navigator, which means that I do all the typing so that you
can focus on the hard part, which is all the thinking. And in other words, you're in the lead,
Wes. Okay. Sounds good. I mean, this is fun because, you know, often people describe me as
a data scientist. And it's true that I started out doing a lot of data analysis. But then over the
last 10 or 15 years, I've mostly been doing engineering on data tools. And so it's actually
surprisingly infrequent that I actually sit down and work with a dataset. So I enjoy when I
actually get to sit down and do data analysis. Since more often than not, I'm doing engineering
on the tools and less of like the day-to-day, like in the driver's seat as a data scientist.
But yeah, so we've got some data to look at that I put together last night. I actually
haven't looked at these datasets, but I thought that it would be cool to take a look at the
50 most popular Python projects on GitHub, at least ranked by GitHub stars. And so what I did
was I asked Cloud Code to build some data scraping scripts, which I can publish on GitHub so other
people can get them and use them to scrape the data themselves. You need to put in a GitHub API
key to get around rate limits and so forth. But basically, these are – this is raw data straight
out of the GitHub API. It includes commit data and issue and pull request data. And so I thought that
by analyzing the – this data, we could get some sense of like what's going on in these projects,
maybe like what people are talking about. I don't know. If you've got an entropic API key,
maybe we could get some – we could install chat lists and get some like LLM summaries of
activity in these projects. So who knows what we'll get into. But we've got some raw data and
so I think I sent you the tarball of all these datasets. So we can start by untarring the
datasets. And there's some other datasets that I prepared that we're not going to look at,
but I think we'll just start to look at the GitHub data. And since you did write, you know,
Python Polars, the definitive guide, we'll use Polars today. And we'll do the work inside
Positron. So maybe we'll get to use the Data Explorer a little bit that I've worked on.
And we'll see what we find. Excellent. So let's see here. So I have the file that you sent me,
this tarball. Yeah. I'm currently in a terminal, but we can immediately do this in Positron too,
if you like. Yeah, why don't you just flip to Positron and you can pull up the terminal there.
So just to make it a little bit easier. I think you do like, yeah, exactly.
Absolutely. Let me make this a bit larger.
Yeah. So just tar.xfs that. There we go.
All right. So we have a data directory here. I didn't sanitize the GitHub repos for bad
language. I guess there's a popular Python project that has a bad word in it. So
I apologize. I can always delete that one, I guess. But yeah, so the directory that we're
looking at is the GitHub repos. Let's maybe, I don't know, let's open up like
the Ansible file and just see what's going on in there. Okay.
All right. Move some panels over here. Yeah. Okay. So we've got, looks like a big
nested JSON file. Lots of data. Yeah. With issues and
all kinds of stuff. So we've got issues and recent commits. Could you open up the issues
and see what the, let's see what the structure of the issues looks like. Okay.
Okay. So we've got issues, issue, issue labels.
Are there, yeah, there's probably comments in there. So let's see if we can,
so yeah, there's an indicator if it's a pull request or not. If the issue is,
if the issue is closed, there's the issue, there's the issue body.
Right. So a pull request is also internally stored as an issue.
Yeah. So in GitHub, in GitHub, like issues and pull requests are the same
like entity type, like in their, in their storage models. So there's just a flag,
whether something's a, whether something is a pull request or not. Scroll down a little bit.
I was curious to see like what the comments look like. If there's reactions, comments,
comments, kind of getting a sense of like maybe, oh, I guess people's reactions.
So we got, we got all the comments. These are all like comments that people have left.
It's quite a lot of data. Interesting. Yeah. Yeah. So
maybe what we'll do is like, let's, let's start and we can like, we can load one of these,
one of these files with, with pullers and then we can decide like what kind of an initial set
of fields that we want to extract from the, from the file for, for analysis. And then
I'm trying to think like what, you know, what type of analysis we would like to do with this.
There's a, there's, we've got like, yeah, so we've got, you know, we've got issue,
you know, we've got, so we've got all the issues and pull requests. We've got issue comments.
I think, you know, to, to get the, like, you know, issue, issue labels, the, the, the comment
texts, the, the comment, like the comment date, like the issue creation date that, that will
enable us to start, start getting like a sense of, like, if we wanted to start computing, let's
say like the pulse for each project, like what kinds of issues are, are getting a lot of, getting
a lot of activity. So like issue date, the issue, like the issue labels. So that will get, that
will give you a sense of like what kind of, like what kind of issue or pull requests it is. Like
we want to know whether it's a pull request or, or request or an issue. So we can look at the,
we can look at the pull requests field to determine like whether it's, I think for an
issue, the pull request field is just, it's just blank, but we can, you know, determine that by
looking at the, by looking at the data. And so maybe like if we start working with just a single
file and get it working for one file, then we can work on doing it for, you know, doing it for all
of the, all of the JSON, all of the JSON files. So we can, we can start to maybe, you know, get a
sense across all of the repos of like, you know, like where is the, like what should, which are the
most active repositories, like in terms of like, you know, issues, pull requests, comments, like
to get a sense of, because what I would, what, the reason I was interested in looking at this was to
get a sense of like the community pulse across all these projects, because there's so many,
so many fast-growing projects and they get a lot of stars on GitHub, but sometimes the projects
that get a lot of stars on GitHub don't actually have very active communities. And so it might be
interesting to see like, you know, there's the, there's especially now there's a lot of AI projects
that are, because everything AI, almost everything in AI is written in Python. So there's plenty of
AI projects on GitHub that have tons of stars, but some of those projects don't have very active
communities. And so I thought it might be a little interesting to like get a, to compute some kind of
like a project, like a project pulse. And then maybe we could visualize that versus like the,
the GitHub, like number of stars in the repository and things like that, to get a sense of like
where each project falls on the like hype, basically the hype scale, like community activity
relative to hype, which is measured by, measured by GitHub stars. I don't know how that seems to
you as like maybe a starting point of one analysis we could do. Sounds like I have my work cut out
for me. This is, but we'll, like you say, we'll see how far we can get. Yeah. Yeah, exactly.
Exactly. So I just created a new Python file and we can just keep it like this
for now. First I need to set up a virtual environment. So.
Yeah. And Positron has, we've, we've been doing a lot of work on UV support in,
in, in Positron. So there's still rough edges. I mean, Positron is still a relatively new,
relatively new project, but if you're a, if you're a UV user, we are, you know, we,
we want UV to just, just work and, and, and the, since it, you know, everyone's, I'm using UV in a
lot of personal projects. And so even though historically I've been more of a, more of a
Conda user, but, but it's a great, it's a great tool. It is, it is just so fast. Let me see here.
It seems like Positron has picked up on this virtual environment. There's only one way to
find out. Yeah, maybe you can go over to the, yeah, maybe you can flick over to the console
here to see the, there we go. Of course. Yeah. Okay. That works. Okay. Yeah, that worked.
Let me see. That looks like you've got multiple, multiple sessions. So that little window to the
right of the console is the session, session selector. So like Positron, you can have a,
see, there's the UV from your virtual environment. I guess you had another one from before. I think
you could probably just kill that other session. But one cool thing about Positron is you can have
like several Python sessions going at once. And you could have like one session that's attached
that you're doing one set of work in, and then another one, or even you could be testing like
multiple versions of Python at the same time and switch between them in the session selector.
But you can also use R and Python in the same Positron session and switch between like an R
session and a Python session, which is pretty cool. Anyway. That is really cool. So yeah.
Yeah. My talk at Conf is actually going to be about polyglot data science or
how to use multiple languages at the same time. So this is very exciting.
Awesome. Okay. And then I guess let's start by reading some JSON.
And see GitHub reposts. Oh yes, of course.
All right.
This is going to be interesting because I think it's like one big JSON object.
And so I'm curious like what Polars does with that. So it's one, it's a single row.
Yeah, exactly. It's a single object in JSON.
Yeah. So it's one, it's one massive struct. So how are your skills at unpacking? Well,
I guess we can do struct field selection with Polars. So I guess if we look at the,
yeah, let's look at the struct type.
There are two tools that you can use. You know what, and I'll just admit that right
before this session, I quickly had to look it up. And where is it?
So I have here my book, which of course I
didn't write by myself. I co-authored with Thijs Nieuwdorp. But sometimes you just have
to reread what you've written. So there are two. So in this particular example,
also a single object in the JSON, Pokedex.json file. And there are two tools that we can use,
two methods. One is explode, and one is unnest. So explode, which is used to turn every item
into a list into a new, that is in a list into a new row and unnest. So.
Yeah. So it sounds like probably our first step is that we want to unnest, since this is like
a big JSON blob with one row. So we want to unnest it, right?
Exactly. So we can unnest, and that takes in the column name, which is called metadata.
Let me see here. The output is now shown in the console. There's a lot going on.
We go all the way up. Or maybe if I
save it to a variable, then we at least get it into, we can get it into the Data Explorer,
which might be easier to look at.
Oh, so it's still one row. It's still one object. But now we have 80 more columns.
Yep.
These were all part of the metadata key inside this JSON.
Yeah, because it's still just all one, all one repo.
Yeah.
Okay. So, all right. So we got all these, we got all these URLs. We got the project description.
And so whenever we have a list.
So this is the, yeah, so this is the project. So this is the project metadata, which
Let me see. I thought that we also had the number of, oh, we have a forks count.
Is that something that you could use as part of the pulse calculation?
For stargazers, this is the number of stars. Stargazers count.
Yeah.
So that's something that we want to
select.
Yeah, I'd like that. I think if we go back to the JSON file, so if we go up a little bit,
so maybe collapse the metadata field if you can.
Yeah. Although I guess full name would also be interesting, right?
Yeah. The metadata full name.
Yeah.
Yeah. So then it looks like the issues are separate from the metadata field.
Exactly. So if we collapse this, issues is another top level key over here.
Yep. All right. That's an array, right? And so if we, yeah, because we want to flatten that into
Exactly.
Well, the issues, I think the issues are actually, they're a sibling of metadata.
Are they?
The metadata is currently collapsed.
Yeah. So issues is a sibling of metadata.
And meaning it's still, well, it's still, I called the data frame.
It's in DF, yeah.
It's also still in DF metadata.
So it is.
Yeah. So my name here is not really correct.
Oh, I see. Okay. So when you do the unnest operation in polars, it like,
it adds it to basically, like, if you scroll all the way down to the bottom is issues down in there.
Oh, there it is. Okay. Yeah.
Yep.
Cool. Oh, that's nice. I just double clicked on issues and then it, you actually worked on the
data explorer. Is that right?
That's right. Yeah. Yeah. So like, yeah. So this side panel view is the, like, all the columns
in the data set, there's summary histograms, like, so when you get like a more traditional,
a very not nested data set, you would get histograms and value count histograms in the,
in the, in the summary pane.
But it is nice that when you have like a ton of columns that you can just double click on a column
and it will jump to, jump to that column in the, in the data set.
Yeah. Very nice.
Since this is a list, I think we now want to use that other method
to turn them into individual rows.
That would be explode issues.
I'm not really good at naming unless you, feel free to suggest.
No, that's totally fine. That's totally fine.
Clean this up a little bit.
I trust you on this. This is also, this is also fun for, you know, good, good use case for Polars
because, you know, Canvas doesn't have, you know, as much built-in capabilities for, for,
for working with highly nested data. So like whenever, and Polars is, Polars uses, uses
Arrow natively. And so when we were, you know, designing Arrow 10, you know, 10 years ago,
like this was one of the use cases where I'm having a, you know, next generation data frame
library with really good nested data, nested data handling was something that we, something
we really wanted. So I'm, I'm happy that, that we, happy that we have it, have it now.
So it was always the goal.
Yeah.
Okay.
This is currently running.
Now we have issues, 50 rows.
Okay.
And anything that's, that's not part of the thing that's being exploded is being repeated.
Okay. And so it looks like my, looks like my data parsing script, my data scraper only,
only downloaded the data for the 50 most recent, like most recently updated, updated issues. So
if I wanted to get more comprehensive dumps of like every issue in the Ansible repository,
and all of these repositories, I would have to have, have the data scraper paginate.
And with, you know, if you have API rate limits, it would probably take,
my guess would be several days to scrape all of the, all of the issue and pull request data for
the 50 most popular repositories. But at least with this small snapshot of data,
we should be able to get at least a flavor of a pulse of what's going on in, in this repository.
Exactly. Exactly. So we'll, we'll figure something out.
Yeah. So maybe, so maybe the next step here, so we've got the issues.
So, okay. So, so what's going on in this, so now you're going to un-nest the, un-nest the issues
field. Okay. It's got lots of columns now. Look back there. Okay. So looking more interesting.
Very handy that un-nest feature. Lots of URLs. And the cool thing about, so one of the cool
things about, about Arrow and, and Polars is that these un-nest operations, they, they do very little
actual data copying. They reuse the, the, the arrays, arrays that represent the data. They,
they just move them around. So, so these operations in theory should be, should be fairly,
fairly efficient. Oh, that's fantastic. Yeah. Okay. So we got, so now we've got a table of
issues, all the issue columns. And so we've got people who left the, left the comment, the issues.
I assume we have a field later, later on in here with the issue comments. So maybe,
I think for the comments, like probably we just want to count the comments and see like
how many comments are, are on the issues to get some sense of like a good measure of issue
activity. Oh, wow. We have a, the comment, the comment, the comment count. Okay. That's great.
It looks like these issue numbers are all out of order. I wonder how,
yeah, I wonder how the, the data scraper, it, if the issues are in like random order,
or I wonder what it, what it selected. I'll have to go back and improve the,
improve the, the, the data scraping script.
Okay. Oh, and then, oh, and there's the pull request field at the end. So like, what does that
look like? So pull requests. Okay. So now we have some that are null. And so those are just
issues versus PRs. Yeah. Okay. Let me just make a note out of that. So it's called pull request.
Yep. And if it's a null, that means it's an issue.
Just an issue. Yep.
Do we want to make a selection of the columns inside of a, of an issue?
Oh, so like just to subset some of them or have fewer columns? Yeah, there's a lot. So.
We could, so we have, sorry, it's, I don't have too much real estate at the moment just to make
things legible. Yeah. I think just the, maybe the, is there an updated at, at on the issue? Or
I guess we could do like just take. Yeah, there's an updated, currently is. Okay.
Okay. Okay. So updated at or closed, which.
Same. I guess we could just do maybe, maybe create, you know, we could take created at
and updated at and the number of comments and the description, I guess.
Okay. We'll do another select. Yeah. I think actually, if you, so in the variables pane, if
you, if you expand the DF underscore issues on the lower right, you'll be able to, we'll be able to
take a look at the, at the, at the column names here to kind of go through them a little bit.
Yeah. Oh yeah. But it's convenient. Yeah. So we want the, I guess the repository.
And we need some of the, some of the repo metadata as well, like the full name,
stargazers counts. I guess I could move this down to here. Sure. Yeah. Yeah. Now I'm using
two different ways of selecting columns. I guess if we're not doing anything special
and we don't have to turn them into expressions, we can just use the column. Yeah. That's a good
use. Do you have a, like, like them kind of emulation mode and positron or, or key bindings
turn on. Yeah. I'm more of a, yeah. I'm more of any, more of an EMAX. Yeah. I'm more of an,
you know, EMAX team biting key binding user, but I appreciate the power of the power of them.
Okay. Yeah. Created at, so created at updated at, and then I guess the full requests,
I guess we could do like, just do the, let's do the, let's do the, let's do the full request.
Um, the labels earlier you mentioned, is that something? Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. The labels. Yeah.
Let's, let's get the labels and we can wrangle those a bit after, after that. It's like an array
of labels, I guess. Um, let me have a quick look here. Yep. Labels.
Yeah. So that in labels, we're going to want to extract the, um, the name, like the label names.
So like convert the labels field to, I think there's a way in, in, um, in, in pollers to
basically apply a map to select a field out of a, an array, a list of structs.
Yes, there is. Yeah. But, um, trying to think of how I would do this. I would, I would, I think I
would, uh, stick to, let me first try, because the idea is we want to convert that labels, uh,
field to like a list of labels. So you just have to, cause we're not going to flatten that. We're
just going to leave that as a, as a list, a list type and pollers, but we want like a list of
string for the, for the labels. So we want to like, yeah, just project out the, um, yeah, let me just
grab the labels column and see if this code works and then continue with that.
Yeah. Let's, let's see what else. So we want the labels. What else do we want to get here?
Issues is invalid because, ah, of course, because when you, when you un-nest something,
it's no longer a column. And I was, I was, uh, I copy pasted some of that, that that wasn't that.
Yep. Okay.
Exploding column issues is invalid.
Oh, wait. Of course.
Yeah. You got to get rid of that select. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
Nothing was, nothing was selected. Yeah.
Nope. And now we're still not there. Oh yeah. This is a common issue as well, is that you can
have, um, if you un-nest things, you can have columns.
They clobber each other. Yeah.
Yeah. So there's, there's a collision here. And now I think if there's a URL column on.
Yeah. So it looks like we do need to, so we do need to move up like the,
the selection, the, we need to have, need to have two selects then.
Uh, yeah. Let me quickly check if there is, because I'm, uh, it wasn't metadata there.
And I guess, yeah, there's URL over here. So what I could do at this point is say, um,
um, I don't want select, but there is, would it be remove?
Uh, yeah. Like remove URL.
So that's, um, uh, I want to, I want to unselect.
Maybe drop.
Oh, of course there's drop.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah. Yeah.
Drop URL. So I think in this case.
That's inherited from, inherited from pandas maybe.
Still not working, but yeah, I just want to say that yes,
pandas definitely has a lot of, uh, good influences there.
Now what's going on here? Couldn't, oh, wait. Labels URL also duplicate.
How, let me just first double check.
So maybe it is.
Safer to do a select first and then repurpose ourselves.
Yeah. So select, select full name, uh, stargazers count and, and issues.
Yeah.
Not, I guess we need like, uh, issues.
You're right.
I think, I think this is it.
Right. One more time.
Okay. That's looking better.
Yes. All right.
Okay.
Much better. And so, oh, that's cool.
So you can see, uh, like the little histogram next to the, um, number of comments, uh, there.
Yeah. So that's nice.
Yeah. If you expand the, um, you expand the carrot, just like people are familiar.
You see, get like a bigger histogram and give you, get some summary statistics there.
So, okay.
Yeah, that's great.
All right. Progress.
All right. So.
Um.
Yeah. And so I guess maybe the only other thing we might want to do is to, um, maybe, um,
to flatten the, uh, flatten the labels, like the labels field.
So just pull out the label names.
Yeah. Let me see.
There is, there is a way to do this.
It's, it's relatively new.
Um, yeah.
Um.
And.
See if Claude knows.
Yeah. You know what?
I mean, in the meantime, I'm just going to go to, uh.
Okay. Yeah.
So you do, uh, so you do list dot eval and then CL element dot struct dot field, uh, name.
All right. All right. All right.
Yeah.
Lists.
Eval.
EL.
Sorry, that was element.
Or what did you say?
I'm going to go back to the, go back to the zoom window here.
Um, so list dot eval.
And then inside there you do PL dot element function call.
And then you do dot struct.
Dot field.
Um, and then sub, sub, uh, name.
Like the string name.
Yeah. Sorry.
Uh, uh, print.
Yeah.
There we go.
And then maybe you have to.
Does that like over?
Okay.
I, I, I, when you do, when you do with, when you do with columns here, what does that,
what does that end up?
Does, what does that, the result of that do here?
I guess we'll, we'll see what it does, but.
Yeah. So it creates or, or, um, it allows you to create an additional column, but if you don't
give it, um, is it going to overwrite the labels column?
Exactly.
Yeah.
Okay, cool.
All right.
Let's take a look.
Let's take a look then.
Perfect.
It's exactly what I wanted.
Thanks a lot.
All right.
So that's cool.
Okay.
Um, and then, uh, do you know on pollers, like if it's possible to, um, uh, if it's
possible to, when you have, um, do you, do you know how to aggregate on, on the values
inside like this, uh, like labels column?
So for example, if you wanted to get like a count of issues by label name, I assume that
that's possible maybe.
Um, and you want it per issue or per column?
Per issue or, because eventually we're going to apply this to all of our JSON files, right?
So that we have...
That's, that's right.
That's right.
Yeah.
And every project has different labels.
And so like, you know, the, the data will be, be kind of, will be kind of messy.
I guess we could apply some heuristics to try to, uh, group together similar sounding
issues or use an LLM to like, you know, group the, group the issues together.
But, um...
Yeah.
So, um, one thing that comes to mind now is to first, um, uh, explode this so that each
label becomes its own row and then do a group by, um, but there might also be another way
of, you know, uh, uh, doing this.
There might be a shortcut.
Yeah.
Okay.
Well, I guess we can maybe we'll see if we have time for that later, but, um, yeah, maybe,
uh, since we've got this like template for processing a single file, maybe now we can,
um, we can do this for all of our files and make one big, um, make one big Polars, uh,
data frame.
Yeah.
Append them all together.
So we'll leave the aggregation for now.
Yeah, let's, let's maybe just focus on, uh, importing all the, all the data files.
And, um, I guess maybe after, after this, uh, after this video, I will, uh, I can,
you know, take, take him to take a half hour, an hour with cloud code and see and work on,
uh, you know, getting all of the data for all of these repositories.
So we could, um, I can publish a more comprehensive data scraping scripts in case people want
to download, uh, you know, all the project like Ansible has had, uh, tens of thousands
of pull requests.
So you can imagine like the number of, um, the size of, uh, you know, that, that type
of data set would be pretty like many gigabytes worth of, uh, data for all the issues and
all the pull requests and like every comment and pull request comments and code review
comment that's ever been left to be pretty, pretty insane.
Actually.
Um, I guess maybe the only other thing we might want to add is like a flag, um, whether
the, uh, pull request field is null.
Yes.
Or not.
Okay.
So you can add that to like, if you add that to the select like pull requests and then
maybe, uh, you can add that to the width columns expression.
Uh, yeah.
So that would be, I think it's just called pull underscore requests.
Yeah.
So is pull request, is that what you want to use as a column name or what can you, we
can start with, we can start with the column pull request, right?
Yep.
Is.
Null.
Yeah.
And I guess.
Yep.
It's an issue.
Okay.
Just cleaned up the code a little bit as well.
Now we just have one data frame.
Um, do you have your, do you have, do you have your positron?
Uh, what's that?
Yeah.
So I now have two data frames, two variables that I, that we no longer need, right?
DF issues and DF metadata.
Um, can I get rid of those using this, uh, this pane or not the variables pane, but if
you, if you go to the console and you Dell them, yeah, just run that and it should, uh,
yeah, it disappeared.
Yeah.
Yep.
Okay.
Um, and I think that this is.
Fantastic.
Yeah.
So 10% is just an issue.
Is it?
Yeah.
From this, uh, sample of 50, 50 issues or pull requests from, from Ansible.
Okay.
Um, do we want to collapse this back to a single row?
Um, or do you first want to try getting in all the data?
Getting in all the data.
Uh, I think if it's, I think if it's a single row, it'll be a little bit like more unwieldy,
like in terms of doing group eyes and stuff.
Cause I, cause ultimately we're going to want to group by group by full name, I guess.
Yep.
Okay.
Yeah.
You know what?
I think, uh, the most obvious thing tries to, uh, just to use globbing and, uh, put an
asterisk here.
I'm not sure if there's...
Wouldn't that be nice if it just worked?
Let's find out.
Exactly.
And there's only one way to find out and that's, uh, to run this and we're getting an error.
And, uh, oh, so that's interesting.
Read Jason doesn't support, um, uh, globbing.
Now...
Yeah.
I'm sure if you, I'm sure if you mention it to Richie, he'll, uh, I mean, uh, the Polar's
project might, might, uh, um, they might do it.
So.
Yeah, it's interesting.
And, uh, and, uh, I do, I have reported things in the past and then it usually, uh, takes
a few hours before it's fixed.
Um, yeah, the development team is, uh, uh, yeah, they're working very hard.
Yeah, so I guess we may, so we may have to glob the, glob the directory ourselves and,
um, and, and concatenate the, concatenate all of the expressions.
Yeah.
No, no, I mean, in Python, if we do like, uh, if we do like, um, you know, we use the
glob module, so glob.glob with that pattern that will give us the list of file paths.
And then we can, uh, just run that expression in a loop and append them all together.
Yes.
Okay.
Yeah.
That works.
That works too.
The other, uh, thing I was thinking of just to, uh, mention this is to concatenate all
the JSON files using the cat command line tool and then read in, use, use a read MD
JSON.
So new line delimited JSON.
But since we're working in Python, might as well stick in Python.
This might be a pattern that others come across.
Right.
So, uh, okay.
So I believe that would be something like this.
Yep.
Uh, data get hub repose.
I've got to run the import.
Oh, of course.
That's yeah.
Okay.
So we got to figure out the fully, um, and we could turn this into a function.
Yep.
It's like wrangle Jason.
Yes.
Oh, let's do that.
Yep.
Okay.
Read, get, get up, Jason.
That's fine.
Yeah.
Fantastic.
Oh, all right.
That's file name.
Yeah.
Yep.
Oh, no, wait.
I should run this first before it autocompletes.
Um, let me try out the function first with, uh, with one file name data, get up,
repose principal, principal Jason.
Why is it?
It's because of the function is below the it's, uh, it's doing.
Oh yeah.
Yeah.
Cause that, that, that function isn't defined yet.
If you were to run the script.
Yeah.
There you go.
Yeah, that's, that's absolutely right.
Okay.
So this works.
But it would be cool.
Read, get up, Jason, uh, uh, F.
Yep.
Uh, four F in file names and, uh, yes, we can.
Yeah.
Cool.
Well, yeah.
I'm so good at naming things.
Search field not found.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, you know what?
It's probably because, uh, some, um, my guessing is that some issues don't have no labels.
And so that that's going to error that, uh, with columns expression.
Yeah.
Okay.
Then let's leave this out for now.
Rerun this.
Yeah.
Okay.
Another interesting one.
That's quirky.
Ah, I remember there is the F concat.
Was something with, um, I think the error is actually happening in the, in the data processing,
like the read the read, uh, JSON function.
Could be, or it's, it's getting, because it was, what was it erroring on?
It's because yeah, it's not finding the pull request field.
So maybe like, yeah, these are things that we can do later.
Uh, but yeah, because there's evidently some data quality issues.
So, okay.
First.
Okay.
All right.
So we've got 50 repost times 50, uh, samples for each one.
So that, that looks about right.
Yeah.
These are still strings, by the way.
Oh yeah.
So we'll probably want to convert those to proper dates.
Although the, the, you know, since the, since it's a random selection of issues,
it seems that the dates maybe are not that, not that meaningful.
Um, since it's not, not as much of a measure of, uh, oh yeah.
See, there's some bunch of things with no, uh, uh, labels with labels issues with no labels.
Yeah.
Um, so this is crazy.
Like this auto GPT project I've never even heard of, but it's got 177,000 GitHub stars.
So yeah.
Yeah.
There's a lot.
It's, it's, uh, it goes to, it goes to show what I know.
Hard to keep up.
Yep.
Um, I'm actually curious.
Can you pop open that, like the histogram of the stargazers counts just to like,
see the range on these projects.
So like, uh, max is what?
363 K.
Can you go up to the stargazers count column?
Just double click on that.
And then, um, yeah.
And then, and then click on the dropdown and sort descending.
Okay.
So let's, that's a foundation.
Oh, wow.
Oh, there's a programming books.
And that probably includes yours.
That's a, the question is, you know, it's a free, you know, is it, uh, are they, you
know, yeah.
Uh, then maybe free to read.
Um, I mean, your, your, your book is now free to read online, right?
That's true.
Yeah.
The PDF.
The PDF wouldn't be, uh, PDF wouldn't be free.
So, but yeah, as a, as a, um, as a website, it is, yeah, it's free.
It's free to read.
Right.
So cool.
Okay.
All right.
So that's, uh, so that's, that's interesting.
And maybe start doing some aggregations and we can maybe look at, um, it's, uh, the,
the data is not quite as complete as I initially wanted, but I think, uh, you know, given the
time constraint, um, it would have been, you know, even if I,
I had spent 24 hours, dedicated 24 hours to scraping all this data, it might not have
even been, might not have even been enough.
But what's cool is that we build the scripts and then once we get the entire data, we can
rerun the analysis and then we'll be, um, um, we'll be in business.
So that's, that's one of the benefits reasons why I like working with, because here we,
you know, Polar's is perfectly capable of handling, you know, millions or tens of millions
or hundreds of millions of rows, but it's nice to work on a small subset of data like
this, like things run instantly.
You don't have to worry about running out of memory.
And, uh, and so we don't have to spend a lot of time, time waiting.
So whenever we scale up a thousand times from here, uh, things should, uh, things should
just work.
So, all right.
Well, um, yeah.
So you were saying aggregations?
Um, yeah.
So, I mean, maybe, I think maybe, like, um, maybe some crude, like some crude measure
we could do would be to look at, like, we sum the number of, like, sum the number of
comments by, by repository and then we could plot, like, number of comments for each, like,
repository and then make, uh, an XY chart comparing, like, a scatterplot looking at,
um, on one axis, the number of GitHub stars, and then on the other axis, like, the number
of comments.
So the number of comments is a proxy for the community pulse, like community activity.
And so then we could see, like, so it looks like actually this ebook repository, there
are issues, but the issues don't have a lot of comments.
But if you look at, like, for example, do comment sort descending, maybe, um, you might
need to clear the column sorting top left and up there.
Clear sorting, yeah.
And then, yeah.
Oh, yeah.
So it looks like, yeah, I don't know what, I'd be curious, like, what, uh, what issue
that is that's, uh, generating that much.
Oh, it's an issue in PyTorch that has almost 2,000 comments.
So clearly PyTorch is a project that has a really engaged community, and yet it has
one quarter the number of stars as the, uh, free programming books.
So, you know, this, it'd be interesting to look at.
Yeah, definitely.
So we'll group, we'll group by full name, and then we'll take the Stargazer count, just
the first occurrence, and we sum all the comments.
Sounds good?
Yep.
All right.
Sounds good.
So that would be cf all group underscore by, um, full name, and then we do aggregation
where we say Stargazer's count.
We just grab the first one, and the comments column, we do the sum.
And this would be, uh, df for our scatter plot, df scatter.
Okay, so Stargazer's count comments.
So assuming we sort by comments descending, we can see the, you know, who's vibing the
most.
It looks like PyTorch is vibing.
Yeah.
Open assistant.
Okay.
Scikit, Scikit-learn, Stable Diffusion Web UI, which I'd never heard of, although I can
understand, I can imagine what it's for.
Let's see, uh, Keras, CPython, very interesting.
Um, cool, very cool.
Yeah, maybe, uh, yeah, absolutely.
Let's, uh, let's have a look.
Should we use, uh, let's use, uh, let's use, uh, let's use, uh, let's use, uh, let's use
Yeah, absolutely.
Let's, uh, let's have a look.
Should we use, um, Pick Your Poison?
Maybe, you know, Plotly or, um, you want to use Plot9 or what?
I'm, I, I'm a big fan of Plot9, but you're in charge.
Okay, let's see, can, does Plot9, will you be able to, like, uh, hover over, get, like,
tooltips whenever you hover over the, uh?
No, unfortunately, uh, they're static images.
So.
Okay.
How about Altair?
Yeah.
The default plotting backend of Polars.
Okay, that's, that works for me.
I think, uh, we can just do, wait.
Just, just do, yeah, it has a scatter built in, right?
It looks like.
Yeah, I think, yeah, scatter, I think it's an alias x and y.
Hmm.
Star, star gazers count.
Okay, here we go.
It appears in the plots pane.
Oh, that's interesting.
Oh, and now I guess it would be good to have as a tooltip.
As a label, like the, uh.
Ooh, let me see here.
Maybe do like label equals full name.
I'm being optimistic.
You know what?
Let's just try it out.
Um, I'm not seeing it as an argument here, but it might still be passed on to, uh.
Let's see.
Altair.
No.
Right.
I'm just, okay.
Now I'm kind of, uh, cheating.
I'm setting the color to full name, which doesn't make any sense, but then it's still,
it does appear in the tooltip.
Text is so an alter.
It's, uh, the, the field you want to text equals, I think.
Yeah.
So an alter, it's, uh, the, the field you want to text equals, I think.
See if that works.
No, no, unfortunately not.
Okay.
But, but color, color kind of worked.
You're okay with that.
It appears.
Yeah.
So we don't, don't look at the legend, but we can still hover over these, um.
So here's PyTorch up here.
Yeah.
It says, yeah.
Cloud says Polaris does not have the, uh, yeah, ability to, oh, I see.
Okay.
Yeah.
Oh, okay.
There, there it is.
The, that's kind of a hack with the color.
Yeah.
Exactly.
It's a hack.
And the alter is obviously much more powerful.
Um, so we're not doing it a really good service.
Yeah.
So it looks like that, uh, so it looks like that outlier up, up top is PyTorch.
I'm curious, like maybe what are some of the other, um, uh, features that you
might be able to add to PyTorch or some of these other like super engaged
communities, just like at learn that doesn't surprise me, home assistant.
For all the home labbers, um, it turns out like I'm not that much of a home
labber because I, I'm like really not that good at, uh, like server configuration
and DevOps and all the stuff that you have to do to run a home lab.
But now, um, now that I have cloud code, I mean, I, I actually am starting to set
being able to deploy like little AI generated apps at home because I can have
cloud code, make all the like Ansible playbooks and deployment stuff that I
don't like working on myself.
And so it spares me.
It's like having a, it's like having, um, a pair programming friend who's really
good at like, uh, home DevOps, uh, to write the scripts for me.
So, um, yeah, it's a pretty, pretty unbelievable.
Uh, let's say, okay.
Uh, Keras, that's cool.
CPython, super engaged.
No surprise.
Um, Django, Ansible.
Let's see what else we got there.
Llama.
Okay, cool.
Sumpfy UI, I never heard of.
Auto GPT, that's interesting.
So I guess like auto GPT is like one of those, like, it sounds like a, like a
really hype project.
Like there's a bunch of comments, but it stars relative to the number of comments
be cool to have like the access to the full data.
And these are like, you know, basically repositories that are like free resources
for people learning to programs.
So like awesome Pythons learning resource looks like another learning resource.
And then maybe, maybe another learning resource here.
Yeah.
Interesting.
And now here it's like, and I guess maybe down the year, these projects that have
like between 50,000 and a hundred thousand get up stars, but don't have that much
community activity, or also like, this is like the hype zone.
So yeah, definitely.
Oh, okay.
Great.
Zoom in.
It's nice.
Yeah.
So now, now we're in like the hype zone down here.
So I assume this is a lot of like AI projects and stuff.
Yep.
What was your criteria for selecting these repos?
Was it at least 50,000 stars or.
Uh, I had the, I asked for like the, this repositories with the most stars on GitHub
initially, like the top 50.
And of course, like we're only getting a sample of, of, of issue data.
So like a more comprehensive measure of like community pulse, especially like to,
cause I think maybe like next stage of analysis, if we have a full data would be able to look
like different projects and see the community pulse over time.
And I think we might even be able to get like the granular.
Um, like stargazer data, like we can see, cause they're like, there's that GitHub star
history, uh, website, but, uh, you know, we can look at that ourselves and like get a,
get a sense of like, you know, when the community, when projects become more well-known
or they get a lot of GitHub stars.
So that actually lead to more community activity.
Sometimes, yes.
Sometimes, sometimes no, but you know, often things end up on hacker news and they get
tons of GitHub stars, but that doesn't always translate to, uh, an active, uh, open source
community.
Yeah.
In fact, I use that same API to sort of GraphQL, uh, uh, point of API.
And, uh, I mean, this is a little bit outdated, but the pandas is still going very strong
there.
Um, yeah, yeah.
This is over time.
So this requires a lot of, of, of downloading a lot of pagination since GitHub only
gives you the first, uh, a hundred results, um, uh, or per page, it gives you a hundred rows.
Um, so that, that takes a while to do that for all these projects, but it is interesting.
Yeah.
Um, okay.
Well, let's see.
Uh, well, I don't want to go too, too, uh, too far down many other, many other rabbit
holes, but, uh, any other ideas for things to look at?
I guess we could look at that, like labels tinker with that.
Um, oh, I guess we weren't able to fully, uh, fully explode the, um, um, fully explode
the labels field.
But I'd be curious to just for my own, just for my own curiosity, I'd, I'd be curious
like how, what's the easiest way to be able to aggregate, um, like number of comments
by label names.
So, so like maybe we could just go back to looking at the Ansible repository, since we
know that that, that one's well-formed, like it has, uh, everything has labels and we could,
um, maybe try to group by, uh, group by label and get like a sum of like, you know, number
or double counting obviously, but it gives you just a sense of like what types of issues
are, um, what types of issues are being commented on.
All right.
Let me just get that into, uh, into a single data frame here.
Um, GitHub repos, Ansible.
Now we have DF Ansible.
With the labels, but.
Oh, I got to restore the, uh, you got to restore the with columns thing.
Yeah, there we go.
Let me put it over here.
Okay.
Nice.
Yeah.
Yes.
I like how the Data Explorer auto-updates whenever the data frame itself changes.
Yeah, that was, we, I worked pretty hard to get that, that working.
So yeah, I, I, I, I personally, uh, made sure that that worked.
Thank you.
Yeah.
Because that's like the whole point of the Data Explorer is like you spend so much of
your time looking at data and like you're looking at the data, you're looking at the
data while you're editing, you're editing your script.
And so actually like one, one thing that's really nice, like, um, if you, um, if you
click on, there's a, the little pop out button to the top right of the Data Explorer, just
to show people watching the video that will open the, that into a new window.
So just go ahead and click it.
Oh, you're, uh, maximized.
It looks like, yeah.
Okay.
Yeah.
So like, what's cool is that if you have a big monitor, you can drag your Data Explorer,
like somewhere else on the screen and, and look at the data, uh, while you're editing
the scripts.
And so like whenever, basically as you edit the scripts, um, and run things like, um,
it will, you know, so like if you maybe, maybe comment out that dot with
columns and rerun and it will show like, it will update the Data Explorer update in real
time.
Um, not at the bottom.
If you, if you get rid of that, um, with columns just to show like, and rerun that.
Yeah.
Oh, it looks like the, um, oh yeah, it's still the old labels column, but, but, um,
yeah.
Yeah.
So super nice.
Yes.
Because often like, as I find often, like, I'm like looking at, I want to be able to
like look at the data frame while I'm editing it and like cleaning it up and say, oh no,
that's not what I want.
And then you, you, you know, you modify your data wrangling and then, uh, you get to see
it, see it right away.
So it helped with that like iterative loop of, um, wrangling your data.
Um, okay.
So I guess like maybe one way, like is the way that you, you would do this would be to
explode labels and then group by the exploded label and some, um, number of comments or
like, what would you, what's the right way to do this?
Maybe just Polaris have some ability to group by a list out, like list, list elements without
exploding.
Yeah.
But every, every issue would only have, uh, a label at, uh, uh, what ones at most, right?
So it's.
Oh, I see.
Okay.
So you can't do like, uh, so it wouldn't, you know, I don't think it would really make
sense to aggregate per row.
So you have to, you need to explode before you aggregate then.
Yeah, I think so.
Okay.
And, um, I might be wrong.
I guess we can just try it.
We can just, uh, yeah, you can go ahead and close that.
Yeah.
I believe this was the zoom level.
And so when you close the, and so when you close that, um, when you close that window,
it, um, it popped, uh, did it pop back in?
Oh, no, I guess it closed the data explorer window.
Yeah.
But that's, uh, that's, that's fine.
Okay.
So we have the ansible and I would do explode labels.
Is there, is there a way to, um, get data into the data explorer?
That's not yet the variable.
There is.
Yeah.
So, um, so down in the console, um, well actually, yeah.
So down in the console, if you, uh, yeah, you actually, you can
do it in your Python script.
So if you do the magic, um, percent view, like, um, like run, uh, yeah.
Like on the left side.
So like before the expression, like that.
Yeah.
Yep.
Oh, that's so nice.
I, this reminds me of, of R studio where you could just do where you could use the view
function or pipe into it.
And wow.
Yeah.
Super nice.
So now we should have like, uh, yeah.
So now click it.
If you click open the expand the labels.
Okay.
Yeah.
This is exactly what we want.
And if you expand this, um, so whenever you hover over the histogram on labels, it will
show like, so this is now a frequency chart.
So you can see, uh, so what it does is it will show like the top, you know, it's like
eight values and then everything that doesn't fit.
Um, so you can see like support community is the most frequent, most frequent label.
Um, yeah.
So we could get the, uh, the top 10 most used labels, for example.
Yeah.
Or we could just, I mean, I guess we could just aggregate number of comments by label
now and then, and look, look at that.
Just look at that in the, in the data explorer.
Number of comments per label.
Yeah.
So, so, so do group by, so do group by, um, labels and then some comments.
Group.
Let me also group by full name.
Just, yeah.
You need, you need a group underscore by.
Oh, you're absolutely right.
Um, group by labels.
Yeah, it's still called labels.
And then you said the number of.
So like PL comments, some, I guess.
Okay.
Yeah.
So we're double counting, but this is, uh, I feel like double counting number of comments,
but, uh, yeah.
Cool.
Okay.
It's okay.
Um.
Looks like maybe there's a bug with the view magic.
Maybe, maybe there was.
Maybe, um.
Okay.
Okay, cool.
There may be sort by comments descending.
Yeah.
All right.
Cool.
Very nice.
Yeah.
Well, I guess with, uh.
Well, I guess if we had a, yeah, if we could procure, um, with some elbow grease, procure,
um, you know, all of the data over the entire history of these projects.
I think this analysis would be, uh, would be pretty, you know, pretty interesting, but
I think already with this sample of data that, that, uh, I was able to download fairly quickly.
We already got some reasonable insights into what's, uh, what's going on in these projects,
but it's clear that on one hand, like AI projects are dominating, are taking up so much of like
the communities, uh, focus and energy these days, of course, there are CPython, which is
always really active because CPython is the backbone of the whole ecosystem.
And then, um, and then you also have, um, you know, people are using Python for DevOps and,
uh, and for building their home, home labs and all those things.
And so I would see those showing up in the, showing up in the, in the data as well as like
web, web development projects like Django and fast API and so forth.
So, um, yeah, I think Python community is, is definitely gotten a lot more diverse and,
uh, um, has expanded to all corners of programming.
Uh, nowadays, you know, when I started out almost 20 years ago, it was, uh, uh, yeah,
it was, we had some web development, but aside from that, uh, it was pretty, pretty limited.
So pretty interesting to see how things have evolved.
Yeah, no, and, uh, as you said, it's, um, we've been working with a limited data set,
but the process is the same.
The code will remain the same.
And so I do think that we did some very valuable things here because it's, um, a lot of APIs
return nested JSON.
So being able to work with that is, uh, is very valuable.
So I think, uh, this might be a good point to, to wrap things up.
Um, we'll make sure that, uh, the script to get the data, uh, we'll put that somewhere
in the description so that people will be able to find it.
And, um, yeah, with that, I want to thank you so much, Wes, for, uh, for being on the
PyD Tuesday Uncut, uh, show.
This was, uh, an absolute delight.
Thank you.
Pleasure.
Yeah, it was fun.